app/blog/posts/life/how-not-to-conduct-a-react-interview.mdx, before:

---
title: "How Not to Conduct a React Interview"
publishedAt: "2024-04-09"
summary: "Discover why Vim, with its steep learning curve, remains a beloved tool among developers for editing code efficiently and effectively."
---

_(Or Any Interview, for That Matter)_

I’ve been working as a React developer for the past three years. Before reaching this point, I went through nearly ten interviews before finally landing a role.

Last year, I had the opportunity to interview a candidate for a front-end position. That experience, combined with all the interviews I’ve attended myself, made me realize something important: most interviews completely miss the purpose of what an interview is actually meant to be.

So I made a list of things I find problematic with many of the interviews I’ve attended or conducted.

## 1. Interviews Are Not a Place to Show Off the Interviewer’s Technical Skills

> “Can you solve this _[insert extremely niche CSS problem]_ by writing a PostCSS plugin?”

This was an actual question I was asked in one of my very first interviews. I was 21 at the time and had roughly two weeks of experience with JavaScript. To make it even more confusing, this was for an **entry-level role**.

As you can imagine, an interview is not supposed to be a stage for the interviewer to show off how technically advanced they are. Before asking a question, it’s worth pausing and asking yourself:

> _“Is this really something the job requires?”_

In this case, the answer was clearly no.

Unfortunately, this wasn’t an isolated experience. In many interviews, especially with relatively young interviewers (I’m not sure why this happens), I was asked questions that had little to no relevance to the actual role. Sometimes it was about:

- Extremely niche browser APIs supported by only one browser
- Highly specific problems tied to the interviewer’s current project

None of these questions helped assess whether I could actually do the job I was applying for.

## 2. Remember That the Candidate Hasn’t Worked in Your Company

Every organization has its own set of tools, frameworks, and conventions. A developer who is experienced with React at one company may have never even heard of the specific libraries or patterns your team uses.

That’s why interview questions shouldn’t be overly tailored to your internal stack.

I’ll admit I made this mistake myself. At my current company, **react-hook-form** is a core part of our codebase. When I was designing a React coding question, I framed it around that library. The problem was that for someone who had never used react-hook-form, the question became unnecessarily difficult.

If the candidate was using a different solution at their company, say **Formik**, their approach and implementation would be completely different. That realization is one of the main reasons I no longer ask form-related questions in interviews.

You might argue:

> “They’ll be working with these libraries once they’re hired, so it’s good if they already know them.”

That’s a fair point, but designing interviews this way means you’ll end up filtering out a lot of genuinely strong developers simply because they haven’t used _your_ specific tools yet.

## 3. “Stress Rounds” Are the Worst Thing You Can Do to a Candidate

Going back to my own experience, I once attended an interview for a C developer role. The first two rounds were fairly reasonable, DSA questions, MCQs, and general technical discussions.

Then a senior engineer joined the interview and everything changed.

He started asking extremely difficult questions, and every time I made a mistake, he responded with insults like:

- “What did you even study in college?”
- “You don’t even know this?”

At that point, I really needed a job and was already under a lot of pressure from the job search itself. The interview turned into a stressful and humiliating experience. I panicked, and after that, I couldn’t even solve the easier questions that I normally would have had no trouble with.

At the end, he told me this was _“part of the process”_, that he wanted to see how I would perform in a stressful environment.

Please don’t do this to people.

If your workplace is genuinely so stressful that you need to intentionally break candidates during interviews, then the problem isn’t the candidate, it’s your **company**. Fix that first before hiring anyone.

You don’t need to be overly formal or intimidating to assess someone’s skills. Just be human. Be respectful. Be friendly.

## 4. Don’t Hide DSA Questions Inside React Questions

If you want to ask a data structures and algorithms question, ask one.  
If you want to test React knowledge, ask a React or UI-related problem.

Trying to mix the two usually results in a question that doesn’t effectively test either skill.

I’ve seen “React problems” that are essentially DSA challenges wrapped in a UI layer. In these cases, the candidate ends up spending most of their time figuring out the algorithm, while their React skills, component structure, state management, hooks, and readability, barely get evaluated.

When you combine these two, you often get the worst of both worlds: a problem that’s confusing, time-consuming, and not representative of real-world React development.

Commit message:

feat: update summary in "How Not to Conduct a React Interview" to reflect a more candid perspective on interview practices

app/blog/posts/life/how-not-to-conduct-a-react-interview.mdx, after:

---
title: "How Not to Conduct a React Interview"
publishedAt: "2024-04-09"
summary: "A candid take on why so many tech interviews fail the people they are meant to evaluate. Drawing from years of React experience on both sides of the table, this piece explores how ego driven questions, company specific expectations, stress rounds, and poorly designed challenges often filter out great developers instead of identifying them. A short reflection on what interviews should really measure and how a more human, role focused approach leads to better hiring."
---

_(Or Any Interview, for That Matter)_

I’ve been working as a React developer for the past three years. Before reaching this point, I went through nearly ten interviews before finally landing a role.

Last year, I had the opportunity to interview a candidate for a front-end position. That experience, combined with all the interviews I’ve attended myself, made me realize something important: most interviews completely miss the purpose of what an interview is actually meant to be.

So I made a list of things I find problematic with many of the interviews I’ve attended or conducted.

## 1. Interviews Are Not a Place to Show Off the Interviewer’s Technical Skills

> “Can you solve this _[insert extremely niche CSS problem]_ by writing a PostCSS plugin?”

This was an actual question I was asked in one of my very first interviews. I was 21 at the time and had roughly two weeks of experience with JavaScript. To make it even more confusing, this was for an **entry-level role**.

As you can imagine, an interview is not supposed to be a stage for the interviewer to show off how technically advanced they are. Before asking a question, it’s worth pausing and asking yourself:

> _“Is this really something the job requires?”_

In this case, the answer was clearly no.

Unfortunately, this wasn’t an isolated experience. In many interviews, especially with relatively young interviewers (I’m not sure why this happens), I was asked questions that had little to no relevance to the actual role. Sometimes it was about:

- Extremely niche browser APIs supported by only one browser
- Highly specific problems tied to the interviewer’s current project

None of these questions helped assess whether I could actually do the job I was applying for.

## 2. Remember That the Candidate Hasn’t Worked in Your Company

Every organization has its own set of tools, frameworks, and conventions. A developer who is experienced with React at one company may have never even heard of the specific libraries or patterns your team uses.

That’s why interview questions shouldn’t be overly tailored to your internal stack.

I’ll admit I made this mistake myself. At my current company, **react-hook-form** is a core part of our codebase. When I was designing a React coding question, I framed it around that library. The problem was that for someone who had never used react-hook-form, the question became unnecessarily difficult.

If the candidate was using a different solution at their company, say **Formik**, their approach and implementation would be completely different. That realization is one of the main reasons I no longer ask form-related questions in interviews.

You might argue:

> “They’ll be working with these libraries once they’re hired, so it’s good if they already know them.”

That’s a fair point, but designing interviews this way means you’ll end up filtering out a lot of genuinely strong developers simply because they haven’t used _your_ specific tools yet.

## 3. “Stress Rounds” Are the Worst Thing You Can Do to a Candidate

Going back to my own experience, I once attended an interview for a C developer role. The first two rounds were fairly reasonable, DSA questions, MCQs, and general technical discussions.

Then a senior engineer joined the interview and everything changed.

He started asking extremely difficult questions, and every time I made a mistake, he responded with insults like:

- “What did you even study in college?”
- “You don’t even know this?”

At that point, I really needed a job and was already under a lot of pressure from the job search itself. The interview turned into a stressful and humiliating experience. I panicked, and after that, I couldn’t even solve the easier questions that I normally would have had no trouble with.

At the end, he told me this was _“part of the process”_, that he wanted to see how I would perform in a stressful environment.

Please don’t do this to people.

If your workplace is genuinely so stressful that you need to intentionally break candidates during interviews, then the problem isn’t the candidate, it’s your **company**. Fix that first before hiring anyone.

You don’t need to be overly formal or intimidating to assess someone’s skills. Just be human. Be respectful. Be friendly.

## 4. Don’t Hide DSA Questions Inside React Questions

If you want to ask a data structures and algorithms question, ask one.  
If you want to test React knowledge, ask a React or UI-related problem.

Trying to mix the two usually results in a question that doesn’t effectively test either skill.

I’ve seen “React problems” that are essentially DSA challenges wrapped in a UI layer. In these cases, the candidate ends up spending most of their time figuring out the algorithm, while their React skills, component structure, state management, hooks, and readability, barely get evaluated.

When you combine these two, you often get the worst of both worlds: a problem that’s confusing, time-consuming, and not representative of real-world React development.
